Title: Emergent Axiom Distillation: Improving Code Generation through Paradigm-Specific Principles

1. Problem Statement: Current code generation models often lack a deep understanding of the fundamental principles and best practices specific to different programming paradigms or problem domains, leading to suboptimal or inconsistent code outputs.

2. Motivation: Existing approaches typically rely on fine-tuning on domain-specific datasets or providing explicit rules and guidelines in the prompt. However, these methods may not fully capture the nuanced principles that expert programmers internalize through experience. By distilling these axioms from existing high-quality codebases and incorporating them into the prompting process, we aim to achieve more principled and consistent code generation that aligns with best practices across various scenarios.

3. Proposed Method: We propose Emergent Axiom Distillation (EAD), a two-phase approach to improve code generation. In the first phase, EAD analyzes a large corpus of high-quality code in a specific domain or paradigm, using the language model itself to identify recurring patterns, principles, and idioms. These are distilled into a set of 'axioms' - concise statements capturing essential truths about good code in that domain. In the second phase, these axioms are incorporated into a specialized prompting strategy. For each coding task, EAD first prompts the model to select the most relevant axioms. It then guides the model to explicitly reason about how to apply these axioms to the current problem before generating the final code.

4. Step-by-Step Experiment Plan:
	Step 1: Data Collection: Gather large corpora of high-quality code for different programming paradigms (e.g., functional, object-oriented) and specific domains (e.g., web development, data processing). Use popular open-source repositories on GitHub, ensuring a diverse range of well-maintained projects.
	Step 2: Axiom Distillation: Prompt a large language model (e.g., GPT-4) to analyze the collected code and extract recurring patterns, principles, and idioms. Use a prompt like: "Analyze the following code samples and identify 10 key principles or best practices that characterize high-quality [paradigm/domain] code. Express each principle as a concise statement." Repeat this process for multiple code samples within each paradigm/domain.
	Step 3: Axiom Refinement: Aggregate and refine the extracted principles across multiple samples. Prompt the model to consolidate similar principles and express them in clear, concise language. Aim for a set of 20-30 axioms per paradigm/domain.
	Step 4: Axiom Selection Prompt Design: Design a prompt that instructs the model to select relevant axioms for a given coding task. For example: "Given the following coding task and list of axioms for [paradigm/domain], select the 3-5 most relevant axioms that should guide the solution."
	Step 5: Reasoning Prompt Design: Create a prompt that guides the model to reason about how to apply the selected axioms to the current problem. For instance: "For each selected axiom, explain how it applies to the given coding task and how it should influence the solution."
	Step 6: Code Generation Prompt Design: Develop a prompt that combines the original task, selected axioms, and reasoning to guide the final code generation. Example: "Based on the coding task, selected axioms, and reasoning provided, generate a solution that adheres to these principles."
	Step 7: Baseline Implementation: Implement baseline code generation approaches: (a) standard prompting without axioms, (b) few-shot prompting with example solutions, and (c) chain-of-thought prompting.
	Step 8: EAD Implementation: Implement the full EAD pipeline, combining the axiom selection, reasoning, and code generation steps.
	Step 9: Evaluation Dataset Preparation: Prepare evaluation datasets for each paradigm/domain, consisting of diverse coding tasks with reference solutions. Ensure tasks cover various difficulty levels and specific aspects of each paradigm/domain.
	Step 10: Model Selection: Use GPT-4 and GPT-3.5-turbo for the main experiments. Additionally, test the method on open-source models like LLaMA-3 for comparison.
	Step 11: Evaluation Metrics: Define evaluation metrics: (a) code correctness (e.g., pass rate on test cases), (b) code quality (using static analysis tools appropriate for each paradigm/domain), (c) adherence to paradigm-specific best practices (assessed by domain experts), and (d) diversity of solutions.
	Step 12: Experiment Execution: Run the baseline methods and EAD on the evaluation datasets using the selected models. Generate multiple solutions for each task to assess consistency and diversity.
	Step 13: Results Analysis: Compare the performance of EAD against baselines across all metrics. Conduct statistical significance tests to validate improvements.
	Step 14: Ablation Studies: Perform ablation studies to assess the impact of different components of EAD (e.g., axiom selection, reasoning step) on the final performance.
	Step 15: Case Studies: Select representative examples to showcase how EAD improves code generation compared to baselines. Analyze cases where EAD performs particularly well or poorly.

5. Test Case Examples:
	Test Case 1:
		Baseline Prompt Input (Direct Prompting): Write a Python function to find the nth Fibonacci number using recursion.
		Baseline Prompt Expected Output (Direct Prompting): 
			def fibonacci(n):
				if n <= 1:
					return n
				else:
					return fibonacci(n-1) + fibonacci(n-2)
		Proposed Prompt Input (EAD; Step 1: Axiom Selection): Task: Write a Python function to find the nth Fibonacci number using recursion.

		Relevant axioms for functional programming:
		1. Use pure functions without side effects.
		2. Employ recursion for repetitive tasks.
		3. Implement base cases to terminate recursion.
		4. Use immutable data structures.
		5. Leverage higher-order functions when appropriate.
		6. Prioritize readability and simplicity.
		7. Avoid explicit loops in favor of recursion or functional constructs.
		8. Use pattern matching or multiple function definitions for different cases.
		9. Employ tail recursion optimization when possible.
		10. Utilize lazy evaluation for improved performance.

		Select the 3-5 most relevant axioms for this task.
		Proposed Prompt Expected Output (EAD; Step 1: Axiom Selection): The most relevant axioms for this task are:
		1. Employ recursion for repetitive tasks.
		2. Implement base cases to terminate recursion.
		3. Prioritize readability and simplicity.
		4. Avoid explicit loops in favor of recursion or functional constructs.
		5. Employ tail recursion optimization when possible.
		Proposed Prompt Input (EAD; Step 2: Reasoning): For each selected axiom, explain how it applies to the given coding task of writing a Python function to find the nth Fibonacci number using recursion, and how it should influence the solution.
		Proposed Prompt Output (EAD; Step 2: Reasoning): 
		1. Employ recursion for repetitive tasks: The Fibonacci sequence is inherently recursive, where each number is the sum of the two preceding ones. We'll use recursion to calculate the nth number by calling the function for (n-1) and (n-2).
		2. Implement base cases to terminate recursion: We need base cases for n=0 and n=1 to stop the recursion. Without these, the function would recurse infinitely.
		3. Prioritize readability and simplicity: We'll write clear, concise code that directly expresses the mathematical definition of the Fibonacci sequence.
		4. Avoid explicit loops in favor of recursion or functional constructs: This task naturally lends itself to recursion, so we'll avoid using any loops.
		5. Employ tail recursion optimization when possible: While basic recursion works, it's inefficient for large n due to repeated calculations. We can optimize by using tail recursion with an accumulator to store intermediate results.
		Proposed Prompt Input (EAD; Step 3: Code Generation): Based on the coding task to write a Python function to find the nth Fibonacci number using recursion, the selected axioms, and the reasoning provided, generate a solution that adheres to these principles. Include both a basic recursive solution and an optimized tail-recursive solution.
		Proposed Prompt Expected Output (EAD; Step 3: Code Generation): 
			# Basic recursive solution
			def fibonacci(n):
				# Base cases to terminate recursion
				if n == 0:
					return 0
				elif n == 1:
					return 1
				# Recursive case
				else:
					return fibonacci(n - 1) + fibonacci(n - 2)

			# Optimized tail-recursive solution
			def fibonacci_optimized(n, a=0, b=1):
				# Base case
				if n == 0:
					return a
				# Tail recursion
				return fibonacci_optimized(n - 1, b, a + b)

			# Usage
			print(fibonacci(10))  # Basic recursive solution
			print(fibonacci_optimized(10))  # Optimized tail-recursive solution
		Explanation: The EAD method produces a more comprehensive solution that addresses both the basic recursive approach and an optimized tail-recursive version. It explicitly incorporates the selected axioms, resulting in code that is not only correct but also adheres to functional programming principles. The baseline method, while correct, doesn't consider optimization or broader coding principles.

6. Fallback Plan: If the proposed EAD method doesn't significantly improve code generation quality or consistency, we can pivot the project in several ways. First, we could conduct an in-depth analysis of the generated axioms to understand which types of principles are most effective for improving code quality. This could lead to insights about what aspects of programming knowledge are most crucial for LLMs to internalize. Second, we could investigate why certain axioms don't translate well into improved code generation, potentially uncovering limitations in how LLMs apply abstract principles to concrete tasks. Third, we could explore combining EAD with other prompting techniques like chain-of-thought or self-consistency to see if a hybrid approach yields better results. Finally, we could shift focus to using the distilled axioms as a tool for evaluating and explaining the quality of generated code, rather than for improving generation itself. This could lead to the development of novel metrics for assessing code quality in a paradigm-specific manner.