Title: Invariant-Guided Synthesis: Improving Code Generation through Explicit Reasoning about Program Invariants

1. Problem Statement: Large Language Models (LLMs) often generate code that fails to maintain critical invariants throughout program execution, leading to subtle bugs and incorrect behavior, especially in complex algorithms and data structures. This issue is particularly prevalent in tasks that require maintaining specific properties or relationships throughout the execution of the program.

2. Motivation: Current approaches typically focus on generating code based on input-output examples or natural language descriptions, without explicit consideration of invariants. Drawing inspiration from formal verification techniques and the concept of design by contract, we propose a method that explicitly reasons about and maintains program invariants during the code generation process. This approach has the potential to significantly improve the correctness and robustness of generated code, especially for complex algorithms and data structures where maintaining invariants is crucial.

3. Proposed Method: We present Invariant-Guided Synthesis (IGS), a prompting technique that incorporates invariant reasoning into the code generation process. The method consists of the following steps:
	(1) Invariant Identification: Prompt the LLM to identify and formally state key invariants for the given problem (e.g., loop invariants, class invariants).
	(2) Segmented Code Generation: Generate code in segments, with each segment preceded by a prompt to explain how the invariants will be established, maintained, or utilized.
	(3) Invariant Verification: After each code segment, prompt the LLM to verify that the invariants still hold and to generate assertions or runtime checks to enforce them.
	(4) Iterative Refinement: If invariants are violated, ask the LLM to revise the code.
	(5) Documentation Generation: The final output includes not only the code but also documentation of the invariants and how they are maintained throughout the program.

4. Step-by-Step Experiment Plan:
	Step 1: Dataset Preparation
		- Create a dataset of programming tasks that require maintaining complex invariants.
		- Include problems involving data structures (e.g., balanced binary trees, heaps) and algorithms (e.g., graph algorithms, dynamic programming) where invariant maintenance is crucial.
		- Collect 50-100 such problems from sources like LeetCode, HackerRank, and algorithm textbooks.
	Step 2: Baseline Implementation
		- Implement two baseline methods:
			1. Standard code generation: Directly prompt the LLM to generate code for each problem.
			2. Chain-of-Thought (CoT) code generation: Use CoT prompting to guide the LLM through the problem-solving process.
	Step 3: IGS Implementation
		- Implement the Invariant-Guided Synthesis method:
			1. Invariant Identification Prompt
			2. Segmented Code Generation Prompt
			3. Invariant Verification Prompt
			4. Iterative Refinement Prompt
			5. Documentation Generation Prompt
	Step 4: Model Selection
		- Use GPT-4 from the OpenAI API for all experiments, as it has demonstrated strong code generation capabilities.
	Step 5: Evaluation Metrics
		- Implement the following evaluation metrics:
			1. Correctness: Percentage of test cases passed for each problem.
			2. Invariant Preservation: Percentage of invariants correctly maintained throughout the program execution.
			3. Code Quality: Use automated tools (e.g., pylint for Python) to assess code quality metrics such as complexity and maintainability.
			4. Documentation Quality: Manual evaluation of the generated documentation for clarity and completeness in explaining invariant maintenance.
	Step 6: Experiment Execution
		- For each problem in the dataset:
			1. Generate solutions using both baseline methods and IGS.
			2. Run the generated code against the test cases.
			3. Analyze the code for invariant preservation.
			4. Assess code quality using automated tools.
			5. Evaluate the quality of the generated documentation.
	Step 7: Result Analysis
		- Compare the performance of IGS against the baseline methods across all evaluation metrics.
		- Conduct statistical significance tests (e.g., paired t-tests) to determine if the differences in performance are statistically significant.
	Step 8: Ablation Studies
		- Perform ablation studies to understand the impact of each component of IGS:
			1. Remove the invariant identification step.
			2. Remove the invariant verification step.
			3. Remove the iterative refinement step.
		- Compare the performance of these ablated versions with the full IGS method.

5. Test Case Examples:
	Test Case 1:
		Baseline Prompt Input (Standard Code Generation): Implement a function to insert a new node into a binary search tree while maintaining the BST property.
		Baseline Prompt Expected Output (Standard Code Generation):
			def insert(root, key):
				if root is None:
					return Node(key)
				if key < root.key:
					root.left = insert(root.left, key)
				else:
					root.right = insert(root.right, key)
				return root
		Proposed Prompt Input (IGS; Step 1: Invariant Identification): Given the problem of inserting a new node into a binary search tree, identify and formally state the key invariants that must be maintained throughout the program's execution.
		Proposed Prompt Expected Output (IGS; Step 1: Invariant Identification):
			1. BST Property: For every node, all keys in its left subtree are smaller than its key, and all keys in its right subtree are greater than its key.
			2. Tree Structure: The binary tree structure is maintained after insertion.
			3. Unique Keys: Each key in the BST is unique.
		Proposed Prompt Input (IGS; Step 2: Segmented Code Generation): Generate the code for inserting a new node into a binary search tree. Before writing the code, explain how you will establish, maintain, or utilize the following invariants:
			1. BST Property
			2. Tree Structure
			3. Unique Keys
		Proposed Prompt Expected Output (IGS; Step 2: Segmented Code Generation):
			To maintain the invariants:
			1. BST Property: We'll compare the new key with the current node's key and recursively insert into the left subtree if smaller, or the right subtree if larger.
			2. Tree Structure: We'll create a new node only when we reach a null child, maintaining the tree structure.
			3. Unique Keys: We'll assume keys are unique and not handle duplicates explicitly.
			Here's the code:
			def insert(root, key):
				if root is None:
					return Node(key)
				if key < root.key:
					root.left = insert(root.left, key)
				elif key > root.key:
					root.right = insert(root.right, key)
				return root
		Proposed Prompt Input (IGS; Step 3: Invariant Verification): Verify that the following invariants still hold after the code segment you just generated. If any invariants are violated, explain why:
			1. BST Property
			2. Tree Structure
			3. Unique Keys
		Proposed Prompt Expected Output (IGS; Step 3: Invariant Verification):
			1. BST Property: Maintained. The new node is inserted in the correct position based on its key value.
			2. Tree Structure: Maintained. A new node is only created at a leaf position.
			3. Unique Keys: Partially maintained. The code doesn't handle the case of duplicate keys, which could violate this invariant.
			To fully maintain the Unique Keys invariant, we should add a check for equality and decide how to handle duplicate keys (e.g., ignore them or update an existing node).
		Proposed Prompt Input (IGS; Step 4: Iterative Refinement): The Unique Keys invariant was partially violated. Please revise the code segment to ensure this invariant is fully maintained.
		Proposed Prompt Expected Output (IGS; Step 4: Iterative Refinement):
			Here's the revised code that fully maintains the Unique Keys invariant:
			def insert(root, key):
				if root is None:
					return Node(key)
				if key < root.key:
					root.left = insert(root.left, key)
				elif key > root.key:
					root.right = insert(root.right, key)
				else:
					# Key already exists, do not insert duplicate
					return root
				return root
		Proposed Prompt Input (IGS; Step 5: Documentation Generation): Provide documentation for the generated code, explaining how each invariant is established, maintained, and utilized throughout the program.
		Proposed Prompt Expected Output (IGS; Step 5: Documentation Generation):
			Function: insert(root, key)
			Purpose: Insert a new node with the given key into a binary search tree while maintaining all invariants.
			Invariants:
			1. BST Property: For every node, all keys in its left subtree are smaller than its key, and all keys in its right subtree are greater than its key.
				- Maintained by comparing the new key with the current node's key and recursively inserting into the appropriate subtree.
			2. Tree Structure: The binary tree structure is maintained after insertion.
				- Ensured by only creating a new node when a null child is reached, preserving the existing structure.
			3. Unique Keys: Each key in the BST is unique.
				- Enforced by checking for equality with the current node's key and not inserting duplicate keys.
			Implementation details:
			- The function recursively traverses the tree to find the correct insertion point.
			- If the tree is empty (root is None), a new node is created and returned.
			- If the key is less than the current node's key, we recursively insert into the left subtree.
			- If the key is greater than the current node's key, we recursively insert into the right subtree.
			- If the key is equal to the current node's key, we return the current node without modification, preventing duplicate keys.
			- The function returns the root of the updated tree after insertion.
		Explanation: The IGS method improves upon the baseline by explicitly identifying and maintaining invariants throughout the code generation process. This results in more robust and correct code, as demonstrated by the handling of the Unique Keys invariant, which was overlooked in the baseline implementation.

6. Fallback Plan: If the proposed IGS method does not significantly improve code correctness or quality compared to the baselines, we can pivot the project in several ways. We could analyze the quality and relevance of the invariants identified by the LLM, which could lead to insights on how to improve the invariant identification process or reveal limitations in the LLM's understanding of program invariants. Additionally, we could conduct a detailed analysis of cases where IGS fails to maintain invariants or produces incorrect code, helping identify specific weaknesses in the method and suggest targeted improvements. Exploring combinations of IGS with other code generation techniques, such as test-driven development or example-based programming, could leverage the strengths of multiple methods. If results remain unsatisfactory, we could pivot to exploring IGS's potential as an educational tool for teaching students about program invariants and formal methods in software engineering, or modify the project to focus on generating runtime checks for invariants, which could be useful for debugging and ensuring code correctness during execution.